## *Abolishing human exceptionalism*

The discussion around the amount of room we give to nature in our choices, in politics but also in private, is not a new one, but the topic of climate change gave it a new level of importance. Everybody now seems to have an opinion, some more informed than others. I want to add to this discussion and take a look at the topic from a philosophical view in order to make a suggestion for a direction which especially environmental planners and conservationists should explore.

##### I - INTERCONNECTEDNESS
That we are somewhat depending on nature in order to survive seems to be general knowledge in todays society, but humans are still biting the hand that feeds them. Furthermore this argument is only giving the right of protection to the parts of nature, that are of service to humans, it is an argument oozing of a naturalistic and anthropocentric world-view. 
I want to challenge this essentialist approach and ask, are we humans really that disconnected from what we separate so strongly from ourselves, as something only surrounding us? And I am not the first to do so. ‚New ecologist‘ writer Donna Haraway „proclaims that the Athropocene marks a new era, in which humans ‚internalize‘ (rather than externalize) nature“ (JON 2020: 393). Haraway discusses the human exceptionalism with the history of so called species co-evolution and makes the conclusion, that the development of all living things is interconnected (HARAWAY 2003: 26-32). In looking at this intertwined concept of evolution and life, the extraction of humans - as something different, something better - becomes erroneous. The concept of human exceptionalism needs to be dismantled as what it is: a social construct that does nothing but legitimize the pain and destruction our ‚species‘ brings onto this world. 
The concept of ‚species‘ is a widely discussed one in the field of animal liberation. Especially the notion of speciesism, which arose 1971 (PELLUCHON 2017: p. 25), is for many a fitting approach to describe the suppression we, as humans, bring onto all other living beings on this planet. Speciesism is a concept that conceptualizes the lack of intrinsic value we attribute to animals. Anti-speciesism, demands that the interests of all ‚species' should be taken into account, while noting that not every ‚species‘ has the same interests. (PELLUCHON 2017: p. 25) Anti-speciesism argues with more moral passion than Haraways logical derivation, but in the end both approaches seek to achieve what is so clearly right: the end of slaughter, abuse and devastation.
Having the theoretical background, an opinion about what is wrong and what is right is only the first step, in the fight for freedom, we should not take too much comfort in this. In order to fight and achieve a ground of morality, we need tangible agendas, a clear idea of what it exactly is that we demand.

##### II - THE RIGHTS OF NATURE
Nature needs rights! The asymmetry that is currently prevalent in the judicial system between nature and any opponent needs to be ridded. The Individual holds a wide range of tools to fight for their needs and interests, and organizations also get tools assigned by being seen as a judicial constituted actor, the judicial person (ADOLFF, BUSSE 2021: p. 13-14). Giving animals and ecosystems the status of a judicial person in front of the law would create a more balanced symmetry of power and this symmetry would make, under the criteria of fairness, natures interests audible and visible (ADOLFF, BUSSE 2021: p.14). Current tools that nature holds in fighting for protection like there german ‚Verbandsklage‘ are often held back because it is based on very poorly structured rights, so the status of a judicial person would not only create new possibilities but also enhance the currently existing ones and finally give nature the means to be protected (ADOLFF, BUSSE 2021: p. 13).
One example I want to point out here is the Whanganui River in New Zealand, which is the first example worldwide, where the legal category of personhood is attributed to a non-human and inanimate object (HUTCHINSON 2014: p. 179). In order „to compensate the Whanganui Iwi for grievances against them by settlement of Europeans in New Zealand“ (HUTCHINSON 2014: 179) but also to secure the rivers health and preserve the resource for future generations, it got the status of legal personhood in front of the law. What made this major step possible is said to be the change in the societal values in the region. Especially the worldview of the Maori and the relationship that they have with the river shaped this change. I want to note, that the core idea here is ‚I am the river. The river is me’ so to the Maori the river is not something that can be owned, because it is in fact a part of them (HUTCHINSON 2014: p. 181). The similarity of this worldview and the derivation from Haraway I described in the beginning is obvious. So in many ways this is the perfect example of how the suggested attribution of rights, based on a derivation like it was done here, can look like in the praxis. It shows that we don’t have to start at zero, there are small scale examples that give inspiration and direction for the work that needs to be done worldwide, on a big scale.
But that work can only be done if we achieve change in the juridical system. This is very closely related to feminist movements from the past. The process that needs to be done, to change the juridical status of animals and ecosystems from property to a legal being, is very similar to the battle that slaves, and women fought and won (HUTCHINSON 2014: p. 180; JON 2020: p. 400). If you now ask yourself: What really is the core idea of feminism? One can come to the conclusion that it seems to be the radical inclusivity, the will to defend the marginalized and neglected ‚others‘. „This feminist ideal of being radically inclusive, coupled with post humanism, now expands to embrace animals, insects, plants, cells and bacteria as legitimate voices to be heard.“ (JON 2020: p. 400) It is revealed that the question of the rights of nature is „[…] about our mundane politics of representation, which questions what defines ‚us‘, the source of our political solidarity, who should be represented first and who shouldn’t, and thus how to allocate power and level of influence […]“ (JON 2020: p. 400) and therefore should be the interest of every person that wants to fight for a more equitable society. 
So now, having a more defined idea of what it is that needs to be demanded, the next question should be: Who is going to implement the changes? If the voice of animals and ecosystems can’t be heard by us humans, somebody needs to step in. So who is going to be the voice of nature? 
At the moment the group of people fighting for natures rights is diverse, NGO’s, independent environmental planners/conservationists and governmental institutions, to name the most common ones, are theoretically all having the same or at least similar goals: protection and conservation of the natural resources. But the radicality with which each of them stand behind their goals differs. From the personal viewpoint of a student of environmental planning, I want to talk about the lack of radicality that I see in the approach of our field.

##### III - CHANGE
The services that our environment has to offer to humans are defined as ecosystem services. When discussing the importance of nature, ecosystem services are the most commonly used device (ZIMMER, HELFER 2016: p. 297). While I acknowledge the usefulness of the concept in our current society I want to harshly criticize it, and particularly the frequency in which it is used. The first, most obvious problem with the concept is the exclusion of the parts that are of no direct use to humans, or even detrimental. If one only argues with ecosystem services, it inferentially means that there is no argument of protection for the parts that are of no service. But in practice one can see, the idea of ecosystem services is elaborate and covers more parts of our environment than it may seem when one first hears of it. But still, the underlying concept of human exceptionalism, which I already proved to be erroneous, needs to be revealed and discussed more, as by now it is still an essentialism in our field. 
The second problem I see, which is highly intertwined with the first, is the reproduction of the current value system. The approach seems to work in some aspects really great at the moment, but that is because the human exceptionalism is so fixed in peoples minds. But by frequently using arguments that build so strongly on it, we are reproducing this world view even more. Considering that our field is the most official ‚voice of nature‘, we also hold the most power to kick off change. But by staying in the lane of anthropocentric arguments we are doing the opposite. Only using anthropocentric arguments means we are not acting in favor of those we claim to represent. We just argue with their needs as a disguise, in order to reach our own needs. I want to plead strongly for more radicality in the approaches we use and the outcomes we want to achieve, let us be less afraid to challenge the current world view in order to nudge the change!
We all need to come together, the voices of nature, feminists and every person who wants to fight for justice in this world. There are solutions and there are ways to achieve them, together we are strong and able to achieve a milestone in history which is long overdue! Let us rise and fight for the rights of those, who can’t do it themselves!









*Literature*

ADOLFF F , BUSSE T (2021): Welche Rechte braucht die Natur? Wege aus dem Artensterben. Frankfurt am Main: Campus Verlag GmbH.

HARAWAY D (2003): The companion species manifesto: Dogs, people and significant otherness. Chicago, IL: Prickly Paradigm Press.

HUTCHINSON A (2014): The Whanganui River as a legal person. In: Alternative Law Journal, Vol. 39:3

JON I (2020): Deciphering posthumanism: Why and how it matters to urban planning in the Anthropocene. In Planning Theory, Vol. 19(4)

PELLUCHON C (2017): Manifeste animaliste. Paris: Alma Editeur.

ZIMMER M, HELFER V (2016): Biodiversität, Ökosystemprozesse und Ökosystemleistungen. In: LOZAN J L, BRECKLE S W, MÜLLER R, RACHOR E: Warnsignal Klima: Die Biodiversität. pp. 297-302.
